In the Cisco IOS user interface

Ping [destination IP or URL address]
FUNCTION: verify if the computer can connect over the network to another computer or network device. (host can be reached)
RouterA#ping 10.0.0.144
RouterA#ping -t 10.0.0.144 (continuous requests) 


Traceroute [destination IP or URL address]
FUNCTION: used to trace the path between the sender and the destination host.
for identifying potential link bottlenecks throughout the transmission path
RouterA#traceroute 10.0.0.144 

Telnet [domain name or IP] [port number]
FUNCTION: verify TCP stack and application layer software between source and destination stations
RouterA#telnet 10.0.0.144 23

Nslookup
FUNCTION: look up info for a selected hostname 
nslookup 
> rockhard.com 


Show interfaces
FUNCTION: reveal layer 1 and 2 problems, MAC, IP, and stats concerning the specific interface issued in the command  
RouterA#show interfaces fastEthernet 0 

OUTPUTS:
FastEthernet0 is up, line protocol is up: Both the Physical and Data Link layers on the interface are functioning correctly.
FastEthernet0 is down, line protocol is down: This output indicates a physical interface problem. For example, the cable on this interface or on the remote interface is disconnected.
FastEthernet0 is up, line protocol is down: In this case, Physical layer is operational. The line protocol being down indicates a clocking or framing problem. Probable reasons for this are encapsulation and clock rate mismatches.
Ethernet0 is administratively down, line protocol is down: This output indicates that a local interface has been manually shut down using the shutdown command.

Show ip interface
FUNCTION: layer 3 config details (IP address and mask configured on a given interface, whether an access list is applied on the interface, & basic IP information).
RouterA#show ip interface

Show ip route
FUNCTION: find detailed information regarding the routes configured on the router (ip routing issues)
RouterA#show ip route

Show running-config
FUNCTION: find out the whole configuration your Cisco devices use while operating
RouterA#show running-config

Show startup-config
FUNCTION: see the configuration commands that will be loaded to your device the next time it reboots and compare it with your running configuration in order to identify possible unconformities.
RouterA#show startup-config
